--- 
layout: post 
title: Looking at the Stationhead App 
---

Lately, I've been doing some research into creating a streaming radio service
based off Spotify. Yesterday I stumbled upon <a
href="http://www.billboard.com/articles/business/7842255/stationhead-new-app-
spotify-music-industry-streaming" target="blank">this article</a> talking about
Stationhead and had a few thoughts:


``` "It turns everybody into a DJ, basically, so you can play music, you can go
live, there's a great flow and people are commenting -- it's almost as if you
took Facebook Live and layered it onto the platform," said Carter, speaking at
the Music Biz 2017 convention in Nashville. "And it's addictive. I thought I was
a DJ for the night; I stayed up until like 4 o'clock in the morning DJ'ing a
set." ```

I don't want to knock this idea right off the bat - it sounds fun. People loved
using Turntable FM and it seems inevitable that something similar using Spotify
would come along.


``` If you're a popular artist and you have a million listeners and you play 15
songs, that's 15 million streams. And after you're done, the people don't
disappear; with this, if you're off air, people stick around." ```

Already the company seems to be hedging the original bet - instead of 'turning
everyone into a DJ', they are selling the idea of a popular artist with a
million listeners playing on their platform.


``` Drake, for example, has used his OVO Sound radio station on Apple’s Beats 1
to give fans a first listen to each of his last three releases before they
became available to stream and purchase, referring to the premieres “global
listening parties.” Stationhead would provide a similar experience for both
artist and listener, with the added bonus that every single listener would mean
one individual stream per song on the album; if just half the 10 million people
who follow him on Spotify tuned in to a Stationhead debut of More Life, for
example, that would equate to more than 100 million streams of the album’s songs
globally -- in less than 90 minutes. ```

Is Drake really the artist who needs more money via streaming?


``` "A Taylor Swift or a Kanye West with millions of followers, if they start
doing this, imagine the power and the reach," says Gary Greenstein, former
general counsel for SoundExchange who is now a partner at Wilson Sonsini
Goodrich & Rosati, which represents Stationhead. "And the fact that they can
make money off it and they can help break bands and the labels can get their
artists to do it; this is a very, very powerful tool in an age where there's so
much noise." ``` Again - this idea has completely pivoted from people sharing
fun playlists with each other to Drake, Taylor Swift and Kanye West reaching a
bigger audience. Streaming listening habits are already <a
href="https://www.theverge.com/2015/12/29/10636712/music-inequality-in-2015
-youtube-google-spotify-apple-tidal" target="_blank">incredibly
tilted</a>towards these top-tier artists, and this app wants to point it even
*more* in their favor?

For the record I've enjoyed the Drake radio shows and they have broken some new
artists. So if this wants to be Beats 1 with the caveat that the artists will
get paid for being on a show, that's fine. But this service should decide
whether it wants to be Turntable FM or Beats 1.


``` "It democratizes the playlist process," says Rob Wells, former head of
digital at Universal Music Group and now an advisor to Stationhead. "You're no
longer relying on a Friday afternoon playlist, or a rock playlist; you follow
various people and you're introduced to new music by entities that you have
faith in, that aren't controlled by stakeholders that control the subscription
services. Plus, it gets people through the payment gateway, it will increase
listening, it's something that can be used to introduce new fan bases to new
artists. So it does tick most of the boxes." ```

This seems incredibly dishonest given that they're already angling for top
stakeholders to control the listening experience!


``` Terrestrial radio, according to consumer surveys, remains the largest source
of music listening in the country, but its status as a promotion machine and a
gatekeeper within the music industry is increasingly in question. As smart
phones have become ubiquitous and digital radio and streaming services have
begun to infiltrate both the car and the home, radio's promotional capabilities
have begun to diminish in importance. And after decades of being shielded from
paying royalties to record labels and songwriters for broadcasting records, the
Radio Music Licensing Committee (RMLC) is negotiating with BMI over an interim
royalty rate of 1.7 percent of revenue to be paid to copyright owners, a battle
that has raged for years and that will likely continue moving forward.

But Stationhead's model is not the same as radio's, which is regulated by the
FCC. Because it's built on top of a fully-licensed streaming service,
Stationhead doesn't need to have deals with record labels and publishers;
Spotify's licenses take care of that for them, and its underlying system makes
royalty payments automatic. ```

If they want to replicate the terrestrial radio platform online, they should
just market it as that.


``` "Turning individual fans and consumers into, in essence, a radio DJ, where
they can actually speak over the broadcast channel, that's a good idea," Wells
says. "That's something that's going to enhance the listening experience and
make music subscription services more sticky." ```

And here we come, full circle to the idea that this product is, in fact, a way
to turn everybody into a radio DJ rather than Taylor Swift and Kanye West.

None of this surprises me so much as just disappoints me. Usually this evolution
- amazing idea grounded in 'internet democracy' gives way to corporate interests
and furthers industry ineuqality - takes more time to occur. Here we can see the
utopian ideal give way to reality in one article!



